Atom
The smallest amount of any element
Electron
Negative charge - Orbit in shells (Max 2-8-18-32)
Valence Shell
Outermost shell of an atom
Valence Electron
Electron in valence shell
Proton
Positive charge - Part of the nucleus
Atomic Number
Number of protons
Neutrons
No charge - Part of the nucleus
Nucleus
Centre of an atom - Contains protons and neutrons
Positive Ion
Atom with less electrons than protons
Negative Ion
Atom with more electrons than protons
Isotope
Has more, or less, neutrons than a standard atom of that element
Molecule
2 or more atoms bonded together - Can be same or different elements
Compound
2 or more elements chemically bonded
Mixture
2 or more substances mixed together but not chemically bonded
Covalent Bond
Sharing of valence electrons – Strongest bond
Ionic Bond
Metal gives away an electron – Non-metal gains an electron – Electrostatic bond.
Metallic Bond
Many free electrons - Weakest of the 3 bonds
Features of Metals
Strength, Workability, Stiffness, Ductility, Good conductors
Kinetic Theory of Matter
Above absolute zero, all particles have kinetic energy (KE)
Kinetic Molecular Motion
Vibrational in solids - Linear in gases
Brownian Motion
Molecules within a fluid colliding with small particles (eg pollen, smoke) causing random, jerky motion. A good demonstration of the kinetic theory of matter
Sublimation
Solid to Gas or Vapour eg Dry Ice
Deposition
Gas or Vapour to Solid eg Haw Frost
Latent Heating
Change of state - no change of temperature
Sensible Heating
Change of temperature - no change of state
Latent Heat of Fusion
Heat energy (J) required to melt 1 kg of a substance
Latent Heat of Vaporisation
Heat energy (J) required to vaporise 1 kg of a substance
Heat
Form of energy (J) - Total KE of all the particles in a body
Temperature
Hotness or coldness of a body - Average KE of all the particles in a body Measured in Kelvin
Scalar
Quantity with magnitude only.
Vector
Quantity with magnitude, direction and point of application.
Mass
Amount of matter in a body – units are kg.
Weight
Force created when gravity acts on a mass.
Force
Push or a pull that changes a bodies state of rest or uniform motion in a straight line. Vector quantity - units are Newtons (N).
Resultant
Value of one force that has the same effect as several forces.
Equilibrium
A system where the vector sum of the forces is zero and the sum of the moments (clockwise and anti-clockwise) is zero.
Equilibrant
A force equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the Resultant.
Moment
The turning effect of a force about a point - the product of the force and perpendicular distance from the point - units are Newton metre (Nm).
Torque
Turning effect of a force about an axis of rotation - the product of a force and perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation - units are Nm.
Centre of gravity
The imaginary point from which the weight of a body can be considered to act. If the body is a symmetrical solid then its C of G is at the geometric centre.
Pressure
Force per unit area - units are Newton per metre squared (N/m&#0178) or Pascal (Pa)
Density
Mass per unit volume - units are kg per metres cubed (kg/m&#0179).
Relative Density
Density of a substance with relation to pure water - No units.
Absolute Pressure
Pressure measured relative to a vacuum.
Gauge Pressure
Pressure measured relative to atmospheric pressure.
Differential Pressure
A difference of 2 pressures. Normally internal – external.
Ambient Pressure
Pressure surrounding a body.
Barometer
Device to measure atmospheric pressure.
Manometer
Device to measure low pressure gas in pipelines.
Distance
Change of position of a body independent of direction.
Displacement
Change of position of a body in a given direction – units: metre.
Speed
The change of distance with respect to time - units are metre per second (m/s)
Velocity
The change of displacement with respect to time - units are metre per second (m/s)
Acceleration
The change of velocity with respect to time - units are metre per second squared (m/s&#0178)
Newton's First Law
A body at rest, or in uniform motion in a straight line, will continue in this state unless acted upon by an external force.
Newton's Second Law
The rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the size of the applied force and takes place in the direction of the force.
Newton's Third Law
For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.
Momentum
Product of a bodies mass and velocity - units are kilogram metre per second (kg m/s).
Inertia
Resistance of a body to change its motion.
Radian
The angle produced by the length of one radius around the circumference of a circle.
Centripetal Force
Inwards force created as an object accelerates in a circle rather than traveling in a straight line - units are Newton (N)
Centrifugal Force
Outwards force that opposes centripetal force - units Newton (N)
Angular Velocity
The change of angular displacement with respect to time - units are radians per second (rad/s).
Angular Acceleration
The change of angular velocity with respect to time - units are acceleration radians per second squared (rad/s&#0178).
Amplitude
The size of displacement.
Angular Momentum
Product of a body’s moment of inertia (I) and angular velocity - units are kilogram radian per second (kg.rad/s).
Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM)
The oscillatory motion caused by a restoring force acting in the opposite direction to the displacement force. Examples: weight on a spring; guitar string, ruler on a desk; pendulum.
Free vibration
After one displacement a system is allowed to vibrate at its natural frequency until it stops.
Forced Vibration
A system vibrating due to a periodic force being applied to make it continue to oscillate. Examples: microphone or speaker.
Resonance
Where the frequency of a forced vibration is applied at the same rate as its natural frequency causes size of oscillations to increase.
Cycle
One complete vibration.
Periodic Time
Time taken to complete one cycle - units are seconds (s).
Frequency
Number of cycles per second - units are Hertz (Hz).
Work
The product of a force and distance - units are Joule (J)
Power
The rate of doing work - units are Watts (W).
Gyroscopic rigidity
The ability of a gyro to maintain a fixed point in space caused by angular momentum. More momentum equals more rigidity.
Gyroscopic Precession
An axis of rotation will react and move at 90 degrees to an applied force on it.
Simple Machine
A device that changes the magnitude, direction and/or line of action of a force.
Conservation of Energy
Energy cannot be created or destroyed only converted from one form to another. Examples: A battery takes chemical energy and converts it to electrical energy; a light bulb takes electrical energy and converts it to light and heat energy.
Static Friction
The force that opposes the relative motion of two sliding surfaces - when not moving.
Dynamic Friction
The force that opposes the relative motion of two sliding surfaces – when moving.
Co-efficient Of Friction
The relationship between the frictional force and the normal reaction force
Viscosity
A fluids resistance to flow.